i avehay a eamdray atthay oneyay ayday isthay ationnay 
illway iseray upyay andyay ivelay outyay ethay uetray 
eaningmay ofyay itsyay eedcray - eway oldhay esethay 
uthstray otay ebay elf-evidentsay: atthay allyay 
enmay areyay eatedcray equalyay.
     i avehay a eamdray atthay oneyay ayday onyay 
ethay edray illshay ofyay eorgiagay ethay onssay 
ofyay ormerfay avesslay andyay ethay onssay ofyay 
ormerfay ave-ownersslay illway ebay ableyay otay 
itsay ownday ogethertay atyay a abletay ofyay otherhoodbray.
     i avehay a eamdray atthay oneyay ayday evenyay 
ethay atestay ofyay ississippimay, a esertday atestay, 
elteringsway ithway ethay eathay ofyay injusticeyay 
andyay oppressionyay, illway ebay ansformedtray 
intoyay anyay oasisyay ofyay eedomfray andyay usticejay.
     i avehay a eamdray atthay ymay ourfay ittlelay 
ildrenchay illway oneyay ayday ivelay inyay a ationnay 
erewhay eythay illway otnay ebay udgedjay ybay ethay 
olourcay ofyay eirthay inskay utbay ybay ethay ontentcay 
ofyay eirthay aracterchay.
     i avehay a eamdray odaytay!
     i avehay a eamdray atthay oneyay ayday, ownday 
inyay alabamayay, ithway itsyay iciousvay acistsray, 
ithway itsyay overnorgay avinghay ishay ipslay ippingdray 
ithway ethay ordsway ofyay interpositionyay andyay 
ullificationnay; oneyay ayday ightray erethay inyay 
alabamayay ittlelay ackblay oysbay andyay ittlelay 
ackblay irlsgay illway ebay ableyay otay oinjay 
andshay ithway ittlelay itewhay oysbay andyay itewhay 
irlsgay asyay isterssay andyay othersbray.
     i avehay a eamdray odaytay!
     i avehay a eamdray atthay oneyay ayday everyyay 
alleyvay allshay ebay exaltedyay, everyyay illhay 
andyay ountainmay allshay ebay ademay owlay, ethay 
oughray acesplay illway ebay ademay ainplay, andyay 
ethay ookedcray acesplay illway ebay ademay aightstray, 
andyay ethay oryglay ofyay ethay ordlay allshay 
ebay evealedray, andyay allyay eshflay allshay eesay 
ityay ogethertay.
     isthay isyay ouryay opehay. isthay isyay ethay 
aithfay atthay i illway ogay ackbay otay ethay outhsay 
ithway. ithway isthay aithfay eway illway ebay ableyay 
otay ewhay outyay ofyay ethay ountainmay ofyay espairday 
a onestay ofyay opehay.
     ithway isthay aithfay eway illway ebay ableyay 
otay ansformtray ethay anglingjay iscordsday ofyay 
ouryay ationnay intoyay a eautifulbay ymphonysay 
ofyay otherhoodbray. ithway isthay aithfay eway 
illway ebay ableyay otay orkway ogethertay, otay 
aypray ogethertay, otay ugglestray ogethertay, otay 
ogay otay ailjay ogethertay, otay andstay upyay 
orfay eedomfray ogethertay, owingknay atthay eway 
illway ebay eefray oneyay ayday.
     isthay illway ebay ethay ayday, isthay illway 
ebay ethay ayday enwhay allyay ofyay odgay's ildrenchay 
illway ebay ableyay otay ingsay ithway a ewnay eaningmay: "
ymay ountrycay, 'istay ofyay eethay, eetsway andlay 
ofyay ibertylay, ofyay eethay i ingsay. andlay erewhay 
ymay athersfay iedday, andlay ofyay ethay ilgrimpay'
s idepray, omfray everyyay ountainsidemay, etlay 
eedomfray ingray." andyay ifyay americayay isyay 
otay ebay a eatgray ationnay, isthay ustmay ecomebay 
uetray.
     andyay osay etlay eedomfray ingray omfray ethay 
odigiouspray illtopshay ofyay ewnay ampshirehay.
     etlay eedomfray ingray omfray ethay ightymay 
ountainsmay ofyay ewnay orkyay.
     etlay eedomfray ingray omfray ethay eighteninghay 
allegheniesyay ofyay ennsylvaniapay!
     etlay eedomfray ingray omfray ethay ow-cappedsnay 
ockiesray ofyay oloradocay.
     etlay eedomfray ingray omfray ethay urvaceouscay 
eakspay ofyay aliforniacay.
     utbay otnay onlyyay atthay.
     etlay eedomfray ingray omfray onestay ountainmay 
ofyay eorgiagay.
     etlay eedomfray ingray omfray ookoutlay ountainmay 
ofyay ennesseetay.
     etlay eedomfray ingray omfray everyyay illhay 
andyay everyyay olehillmay ofyay ississippimay, 
omfray everyyay ountainsidemay, etlay eedomfray 
ingray!
     
